I N T R O DU C T I O N

Years ago, when I first heard of Tony de Mello, S.J., I didn't believe what I heard. The story I am about to tell has bearing on the book you are about to read.
I was told that Tony gave a retreat to sixty fellow Jesuit priests and spoke to them six hours a day for eight days. I remember saying, "No Jesuit listens to another Jesuit six hours a day for eight days." When the fact was insisted on, I remember asking, "Who made that retreat ? " The names of some very impressive Jesuits (im­pressive, at least, to me) were mentioned. It was then, like doubting Thomas in the Scriptures, I said, "This I have to see and hear for myself."
Thus began the journey with the man who would affect my life so profoundly that, years later, I wouldn't even recognize the person I was those years past. And not I alone, but thousands of others like me.
The occasion of my first meeting Tony de Mello now seems rather prosaic. He was asked to give a weekend retreat to a group of lay peo­ ple. He agreed to do this on his way back to India from Rome. I asked to be put on that re-treat just to meet and experience the man. It was an unforgettable weekend up in Saddle River, New Jersey, amid the snows of February.
I will never forget the feeling of liberation; the sense he made of spirituality, of prayer, of the meaning of life; his humor; his marvelous storytelling. And it was all done in such a per­sonal style. Years later, when he was speaking by television satellite to more than three thou­ sand college students, he maintained that per­sonal style. "About twelve years ago," he remarked, "I discovered something that revolu­tionized my life." He had met a rickshaw driver in Calcutta named Rinsai, who, although he was dying of a painful disease and was so poor that he had to sell his skeleton before he died, still was a man filled with faith and interior joy. "I suddenly realized," Tony continued, "I was in the presence of a mystic who had redis­ covered life. He was alive; I was dead. He was a man who had reincarnated himself during this life."
The reason I say that the story of my meet­ ing Tony has bearing on the book you are about to read is because when I came upon this manu­script, although I was very familiar with all that he had written (and spoken), I was amazed at how these small but powerful "meditations" evoked in me the same feelings I experienced
when I first encountered him. Just reading through these pages brought back the wonder­ ful sense of challenge, the spiritual provocation that Tony was such a master at providing. There was a basic honesty in Tony de Mello's charac­ter with which he reevaluated everything in his own life. And it was this honesty that he communicated so effectively to all who would listen. His analogies, his stories, his telling criticism of sacred cows-all brilliantly peppered through­ out this book-inspired in me a like reevalua­tion of my own life, and I have never regretted it.
Take each one of these meditations and carry it with you throughout your day. Chal­lenge his ideas, mull over his thoughts, and then be silent. You will notice an effortless transfor­mation taking place in your heart, the awaken­ ing experience of insight, the wonderful peace you experience when you gaze at the stars or watch a beautiful sunrise or glimpse a soft look of love in the eyes of your beloved. This is the effect these spiritual gems will have. All you need bring to them is a full heart and an inquir­ing mind.

J. Francis Stroud, S.J.
The Center for Spiritual Exchange Fordham University
Bronx, N.Y.